[Kubernetes] Add docs for k8sattributesprocessor (#3074)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/kubernetes/collector/components.md

Important Components:

- [Kubernetes Attributes Processor](#kubernetes-attributes-processor) - used to
  add Kubernetes metadata to incoming telemetry.
- [Filelog Receiver](#filelog-receiver) - used to collect Kubernetes logs and
  application logs written to stdout/stderr.

For application traces, metrics, or logs, we recommend the
[OTLP receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/otlpreceiver),
but any receiver that fits your data is appropriate.

## Kubernetes Attributes Processor

> The Kubernetes Attributes Processor automatically discovers Kubernetes resources
> (pods), extracts their metadata, and adds the extracted metadata to the relevant
> spans, metrics and logs as resource attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Attributes Processor automatically discovers Kubernetes pods,
extracts their metadata, and adds the extracted metadata to
spans, metrics, and logs as resource attributes.
```

> **It is one of the most important components for a collector running in
> Kubernetes; any collector receiving application data should use it.** This is
> the processor that adds Kubernetes context to your application traces, metrics,
> and logs. It enables you to correlate your application's traces, metrics, and
> logs with other Kubernetes telemetry such as pod metrics and events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**The Kubernetes Attributes Processor is one of the most important
components for a collector running in Kubernetes. Any collector receiving
application data should use it.** Because it adds Kubernetes context to your
telemetry, the Kubernetes Attributes Processor lets you correlate your
application's traces, metrics, and logs signals with our Kubernetes telemetry,
such as pod metrics and traces.
```

> The Kubernetes Attributes Processor uses the Kubernetes API to discover all pods
> running in a cluster, keeps a record of their IP addresses, pod UIDs and
> interesting metadata. By default data passing through the processor is
> associated to a pod via the incoming request's IP address, but different rules
> can be configured. Since the processor uses the Kubernetes API it requires
> special permissions. If you're using the
> [OpenTelemetry Collector Helm chart](../../helm/collector/) you can use the
> [`kubernetesAttributes` preset](../../helm/collector/#kubernetes-attributes-preset)
> to get started.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kubernetes Attributes Processor uses the Kubernetes API to discover all pods
running in a cluster and keeps a record of their IP addresses, pod UIDs, and
interesting metadata. By default, data passing through the processor is
associated to a pod via the incoming request's IP address, but different rules
can be configured. Since the processor uses the Kubernetes API, it requires
special permissions (see example below). If you're using the
[OpenTelemetry Collector Helm chart](../../helm/collector/) you can use the
[`kubernetesAttributes` preset](../../helm/collector/#kubernetes-attributes-preset)
to get started.
```

The following attributes are added by default:

- k8s.namespace.name
- k8s.pod.name
- k8s.pod.uid
- k8s.pod.start_time
- k8s.deployment.name
- k8s.node.name

The Kubernetes Attributes Processor can also set resource attributes from labels

> and annotations of pods and namespaces.

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence:

- What resource attributes? Is this saying that it adds this data as a resource on your spans/metrics/logs?
- What are labels in this context? Sounds like a kubernetes thing?
- What are annotations of pods and namespaces? Sounds like a kubernetes thing?

Author: I'll add more context

Author: Updated

        from: pod
      - tag_name: a2 # extracts value of annotation from namespaces with key `annotation-two` with regexp and inserts it as a tag with key `a2`
        key: annotation-two
        regex: field=(?P<value>.+)
        from: namespace
    labels:
      - tag_name: l1 # extracts value of label from namespaces with key `label1` and inserts it as a tag with key `l1`
        key: label1
        from: namespace
      - tag_name: l2 # extracts value of label from pods with key `label2` with regexp and inserts it as a tag with key `l2`
        key: label2
        regex: field=(?P<value>.+)
        from: pod
  pod_association: # how to associate the data to a pod (order matters)
    - sources: # First try to use the value of the resource attribute k8s.pod.ip
        - from: resource_attribute
          name: k8s.pod.ip
    - sources: # Then try to use the value of the resource attribute k8s.pod.uid
        - from: resource_attribute
          name: k8s.pod.uid
    - sources: # If neither of those work, use the request's connection to get the pod IP.
        - from: connection
```

There are also special configuration options for when the collector is deployed

> as a Daemonset or as a Deployment. For Kubernetes Attributes Processor

Reviewer: Why are there special configuration options? The link has different terminology that's easy to miss: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor#deployment-scenarios

Author: This is the minutia that I am hoping to callout in a dedicated section in these kubernetes docs but I haven't written them yet.  In the meantime I was hoping to get away with linking to the README since it does a pretty good job of describing the different patterns.  I will update this section to make it clearer.

Author: Updated

configuration details, see

> [Kubernetes Attributes Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Kubernetes Attributes Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor#deployment-scenarios).
```

Probably better to link to here? Or at least have another link that's specific to deployment scenarios.

Author: I'm not ready to link to that doc yet.  I would prefer these docs use kubernetes terms, which unfortunately aren't compatible with the generic deployment patterns.

Author: Updated

Author: I see now that you wanted me to link to the actual section of the README, not the site's collector deployment doc.  I've adjusted this section and linked directly to the important README section.

Reviewer: dank, thanks

> Since the processor uses the Kubernetes API it needs the correct permission to
> work correctly. For most use cases you should give the service account running
> the Collector the following permissions via a ClusterRole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the processor uses the Kubernetes API, it needs the correct permission to
work correctly. For most use cases, you should give the service account running
the Collector the following permissions via a ClusterRole.
```

> Important Components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Components covered in this page:
```

- [Kubernetes Attributes Processor](#kubernetes-attributes-processor) - adds
  Kubernetes metadata to incoming telemetry.
- [Filelog Receiver](#filelog-receiver) - collects Kubernetes logs and
  application logs written to stdout/stderr.

For application traces, metrics, or logs, we recommend the
[OTLP receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/tree/main/receiver/otlpreceiver),
but any receiver that fits your data is appropriate.

## Kubernetes Attributes Processor

| Deployment Pattern   | Usable |
| -------------------- | ------ |
| DaemonSet (Agent)    | Yes    |
| Deployment (Gateway) | Yes    |

> | Sidecar              | No     |

Reviewer 2: It's odd to start a section with a table. Can this be moved, if only after the first paragraph?

Author: I was attempting to replicate the feeling of the table that start each collector component's readme: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor. I can move it if you want, but there is some nice familiarity between the 2 when it is at the top.

Reviewer 2: Ok, let's leave this as is then 👍🏻.

extracts their metadata, and adds the extracted metadata to spans, metrics, and
logs as resource attributes.

**The Kubernetes Attributes Processor is one of the most important components
for a collector running in Kubernetes. Any collector receiving application data
should use it.** Because it adds Kubernetes context to your telemetry, the
Kubernetes Attributes Processor lets you correlate your application's traces,
metrics, and logs signals with our Kubernetes telemetry, such as pod metrics and
traces.

The Kubernetes Attributes Processor uses the Kubernetes API to discover all pods
running in a cluster and keeps a record of their IP addresses, pod UIDs, and
interesting metadata. By default, data passing through the processor is
associated to a pod via the incoming request's IP address, but different rules
can be configured. Since the processor uses the Kubernetes API, it requires
special permissions (see example below). If you're using the
[OpenTelemetry Collector Helm chart](../../helm/collector/) you can use the
[`kubernetesAttributes` preset](../../helm/collector/#kubernetes-attributes-preset)
to get started.

The following attributes are added by default:

> - k8s.namespace.name
> - k8s.pod.name
> - k8s.pod.uid
> - k8s.pod.start_time
> - k8s.deployment.name
> - k8s.node.name

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `k8s.namespace.name`
- `k8s.pod.name`
- `k8s.pod.uid`
- `k8s.pod.start_time`
- `k8s.deployment.name`
- `k8s.node.name`
```

The Kubernetes Attributes Processor can also set custom resource attributes for
traces, metrics, and logs using the Kubernetes labels and Kubernetes annotations
you've added to your pods and namespaces.

```yaml
k8sattributes:
  auth_type: 'serviceAccount'
  extract:

>     metadata: # metadata to extra from the pod

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    metadata: # extracted from the pod
```

        from: pod
  pod_association: # how to associate the data to a pod (order matters)
    - sources: # First try to use the value of the resource attribute k8s.pod.ip
        - from: resource_attribute
          name: k8s.pod.ip
    - sources: # Then try to use the value of the resource attribute k8s.pod.uid
        - from: resource_attribute
          name: k8s.pod.uid
    - sources: # If neither of those work, use the request's connection to get the pod IP.
        - from: connection
```

There are also special configuration options for when the collector is deployed
as a Kubernetes DaemonSet (agent) or as a Kubernetes Deployment (gateway). For
details, see
[Deployment Scenarios](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor#deployment-scenarios)

For Kubernetes Attributes Processor configuration details, see
[Kubernetes Attributes Processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor).

Since the processor uses the Kubernetes API, it needs the correct permission to
work correctly. For most use cases, you should give the service account running

> the Collector the following permissions via a ClusterRole.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the collector the following permissions via a ClusterRole.
```

metadata:
  name: otel-collector
rules:
  - apiGroups:
      - ''
    resources:
      - 'pods'
      - 'namespaces'
    verbs:
      - 'get'
      - 'watch'
      - 'list'
  - apiGroups:
      - 'apps'
    resources:
      - 'replicasets'
    verbs:
      - 'get'
      - 'list'
      - 'watch'
  - apiGroups:
      - 'extensions'
    resources:
      - 'replicasets'
    verbs:
      - 'get'
      - 'list'
      - 'watch'
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
metadata:
  name: otel-collector
subjects:
  - kind: ServiceAccount
    name: collector
    namespace: <OTEL_COL_NAMESPACE>
roleRef:
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: otel-collector
  apiGroup: rbac.authorization.k8s.io
```

## Filelog Receiver

| Deployment Pattern   | Usable                                                          |
| -------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------- |
| DaemonSet (Agent)    | Preferred                                                       |
| Deployment (Gateway) | Yes, but will only collect logs from the node it is deployed on |
| Sidecar              | Yes, but this would be considered advanced configuration        |

> 

Reviewer 2: Same remark as above, can we move this table to be somewhere other than immediately after the heading?

Reviewer 2: Leave as is, as previously agreed.
